# 4.0

* **Release Date:** 2023-12-29

## Overview

This release focuses on developer experience optimization and simplifying or removing features that are no longer relevant based on lessons learned, and cosmetics when using named arguments/parameters.

### New Features

- Add Laravel v11.x support
- Add PHP v8.3 support
- Add throwable exceptions for 4xx and 5xx errors
- Add rate limit backoff handling to avoid failed requests for large data sets
- Add documentation for named arguments/parameter usage
- Add Laravel Collection example usage documentation
- Add `provisionesta/audit` package for standardized logging

### What's Changed

- **Package Architecture**
    - The `gitlab-it/okta-sdk` Composer package and namespace has been abandoned and has been renamed to `provisionesta/okta-api-client`.
        - **Why:** The maintainers are no longer in GitLab IT, so this project is moving to the maintainer's personal open source project namespace (codename Provisionesta) for ongoing contributions.
    - License copyright owner changed from `GitLab B.V.` to `Jefferson Martin`
    - The PHP namespace changed from `GitlabIt\Okta` to `Provisionesta\Okta`.
- **Connections and Configuration**
    - Removed support for connection keys
        - **Why:** The advanced use cases that used different connection keys usually used dynamic database variables or secrets manager values. Developers frequently found themselves commenting out environment variables and uncommenting secondary block of variables instead of switching the default connection. By simplifying to just using a single set of environment variables `OKTA_API_URL` and `OKTA_API_TOKEN`, this aligns better with common configuration across packages in the Laravel ecosystem.
        - **Workaround:** You can define your own connection arrays and pass them at runtime.
    - Removed support for custom log channels
        - **Why:** In a production deployment, the application is usually deployed in an environment that exports logs to a centralized service. This gets compounded with STDOUT and STDERR logs for container or serverless environments. By falling back to the default log channel/stack that the application is configured with, we remove the separation complexity.
    - Removed need for `config/okta-sdk.php`
        - **Why:** Since we only have the `OKTA_API_URL` and `OKTA_API_TOKEN` environment variables, and all other connections are provided at runtime, there is no need for a customized configuration file. The package default config file provides a flat array that fetches the `.env` values.
    - Renamed `OKTA_{CONNECTION}_BASE_URL` to `OKTA_API_URL`
        - **Why:** We have renamed the package from `okta-sdk` to `okta-api-client` and added the related `okta-laravel-actions` package in the same `Provisionesta\Okta` namespace, we are aligning the environment variables with the package name. Since we don't add any additional URLs in the configuration, the need for `BASE_` is cosmetic only so we are shortening it for simplicity.
    - Renamed `OKTA_{CONNECTION}_API_TOKEN` to `OKTA_API_TOKEN`
- **API Requests**
    - Renamed `request_data` argument/parameter key to `data`
        - **Why:** This is for developer experience. We have been adopting the use of named parameters and typing out `request_data` is annoying. There are also perceptive naming variations with `query_string` or `form_data`. It is simpler to just use `data`.
    - Moved `connection_config` from first positional argument to last positional argument
        - **Why:** Since we no longer use connection keys, this is no longer a required argument. Since it is an optional argument, and existing implementation specifies the endpoint URI followed by the request data array, it made sense to add it at the end. When using named arguments, you can add the connection array at any position (ex. first, alphabetical, last, etc.) when calling the API client method.
    - Renamed `connection_config` renamed to `connection`
        - **Why:** This is for developer experience to shorten the typing when using named arguments.
    - Added throwable exceptions for all 4xx and 5xx errors
        - **Why:** This improves developer experience. A lot of unnecessary code was added in our applications to catch errors based on status code. By catching it centrally and throwing exceptions, we can avoid the extra code that is difficult to maintain in multiple places. You can catch the exception where it matters in your application and handle it gracefully.
    - Changed `\Exception` to `\Provisionesta\Okta\Exceptions\RateLimitException` when 429 rate limit exceeded error occurs.
    - Added rate limit backoff
        - **Why:** There was no graceful way to implement your own handling of rate limit with large data sets. This resulted in failed requests. By adding a 10 second delay to each paginated request when <20% rate limit remaining, we can create enough of a delay until the rate limit resets and keep fetching paginated results to ensure successful response with all data.
- **API Responses**
    - Removed `json` property from response
        - **Why:** This doubled the payload size for large responses that increased memory footprint and was rarely used.
        - Workaround: Use `json_encode($response->data)`
    - Renamed `object` property in response to `data`
        - **Why:** This improves developer experience. Without the `json` attribute, the `object` no longer makes sense. As part of other API schema standards, we are renaming to `data` that is casted as an object.
    - Reordered response keys alphabetically so `data` is first, followed by `headers` and `status`
        - **Why:** This improves developer experience. In addition to alphabetical formatting, the `data` key is what is referenced and used for most responses, so there is no need for the `headers` to visually appear at the top.
    - Added documentation to README for using Laravel collections with response data
        - **Why:** Most API responses need to be parsed into usable data sets. This provides best practice examples for last mile coding.
- **Logging**
    - The log format has changed.
    - See [provisionesta/audit](https://gitlab.com/provisionesta/audit) standardized logging package for details on keys that can be used.
    - See Log Examples section in the [README.md](https://gitlab.com/provisionesta/okta-api-client/-/blob/main/README.md#log-examples) for example logs.
    - The event type syntax has changed to dot notation. See all event types in the [README.md](https://gitlab.com/provisionesta/okta-api-client/-/blob/main/README.md#log-examples).

### Upgrade Steps

- Re-read the `README.md` file to see the latest syntax and usage guidelines.
- Update your `.env` file
    - Choose your primary connection
    - Rename `OKTA_{PRIMARY_CONNECTION}_BASE_URL` to `OKTA_API_URL`
    - Rename `OKTA_{PRIMARY_CONNECTION}_API_TOKEN` to `OKTA_API_TOKEN`
    - If you have additional connections, comment out those variables and rename the keys as well.
    - Exceptions will be thrown for 4xx and 5xx errors. If you do not want to catch exceptions, you can disable exceptions by adding `OKTA_API_EXCEPTIONS=false` to your `.env` file.
- Delete the `config/okta-sdk.php` file
- Remove `gitlab-it/okta-sdk` from `composer.json` and add `"provisionesta/okta-api-client": "^4.0"`, then run `composer update`.
- Perform a find and replace across your code base from `GitlabIt\Okta` to `Provisionesta\Okta`.
- Perform a search across your code base for `config('okta-sdk.` and evaluate what changes need to be made since the file no longer exists.
- Perform a search across your code base where the API Client is used.
    - `->json`: Refactor your code to use `json_encode($response->data)`.
    - `->object`: Refactor your code to use `->data`.
    - `new ApiClient`: Remove all instances since we use static methods now. Refactor your code from `$okta_api->get('connection_key', 'endpoint')` to `ApiClient::method('endpoint')`.
    - `->status`: Refactor your code to catch the exceptions instead
- Update your centralized log platform to use the new `event_type` keys.
- This is not an exhaustive list, and you should evaluate all of your code that uses the API after reading the latest version of the README.
